Valery Kazarin, professor of the Academy of People's Economy of the Russian Federation,
pro-rector of the Moscow Open Law Institute and professor of a number of other simple universities.
Doctor of Pedagogical Sciences, State Advisor of the 3rd class.
We have gathered here today to consider a number of issues related to the adoption of the new law.
This is the topic of our meeting.
We will start with the definition.
What is meant by the administrative decision?
There are three different things that are meant by the administrative decision.
The first is the choice of the goal.
The second is the path or the direction of the decision.
The third is the process of the decision.
The second is the path or the methods of achieving this goal.
The third is the administrative decision.
Considering the administrative decision as an administrative decision,
we can note two more aspects of this important point.
One of the aspects is the choice of something.
The second is the process of making this choice.
Why is this topic important and simple at the same time?
It is important because the decision-maker is responsible for it.
If the decision is made wrong or ineffective,
someone is subject to sanctions, including the organization.
Why is this topic simple?
We face this issue every day.
We make decisions every day.
What should we cook for breakfast or dinner?
Where should we cross the road?
What traffic light should we cross?
Red or green?
After the general concepts, we will consider the methods of decision-making and classification.
We will consider the new aspects of decision-making.
And, of course, psychological issues.
People of different psychotypes make decisions.
We should pay attention to this when working with our colleagues,
superiors, subordinates who make and are responsible for some decisions.
Another term is the person who makes decisions.
It is understood as a manager, that is, the one who leads.
If a person does not make decisions, he is not a manager.
But this is not enough.
To be a manager, you need to have subordinates.
So, the person who makes decisions individually is a manager,
the leader who has subordinates.
And there is another side,
the collective person who makes decisions.
That is, a part of the people, a certain circle,
who make decisions together.
We will discuss the issue of decision-making in a moment.
But for now, let's move on to the concept of right and wrong decisions.
We often come across different examples.
For example, on Tuesday, the president sent the government to resign.
Is this decision right or wrong?
Nobody knows today.
In our course, I hope we will learn to make only right decisions.
I can share that as a professor of famous academies,
who has long read the NIMB and conducted training,
I always make only right decisions.
Why?
We will talk about this later.
So, what and how are decisions made?
In fact, the scheme of decision-making itself is very simple.
This is the problem-solving.
What is it?
And what do we need to solve?
The second stage is, as a rule, the selection of criteria and restrictions
when solving this problem.
The third stage is the development of alternatives,
that is, the different ways in which this problem can be solved.
Then there is a choice of one or two of the ways,
of the set that we have determined.
And the implementation of the solution, of course,
with a feedback to the original problem.
In fact, these stages are broken up in different sources.
There are many of them, and we can look and think,
but the essence of this will not change.
Now let's look at the classification of decision-making.
It also varies in different sources.
First of all, management decisions are usually divided into external and internal.
External decisions affect any changes outside the organization.
For example, the development of new markets,
as an example, the confrontation of competition,
as an example, decisions aimed at, let's say,
absorbing enterprises or creating branches.
There are also internal solutions to internal problems.
These are changes in personnel policy,
changes in the assortment minimum,
changes in the price range due to changes in the costs within the organization.
This is one component of the classification.
It does not affect any other components of the classification.
Accordingly, if we look at the scale,
there are decisions made at the state level,
decisions made at the level of the federation,
they all affect our business and the management of our organization,
the life of the general manager.
Decisions made at the level of municipal education
and decisions made in the organization itself.
These are all management decisions at the hierarchy level,
which affect the life and career of the first line manager,
from which management begins.
Next, management decisions on time,
their development and adoption.
They are usually divided into strategic decisions,
tactical decisions and operational decisions.
Strategic decisions consider a period of at least 3 to 5 years,
and are associated with the strategy of the development of the entire organization.
Tactical decisions consider a shorter period of time, up to 3 years,
from one year to three, sometimes from six months.
And operational decisions are those decisions that are made today,
for a week, for a month.
For example, operational decisions.
New Year's Eve.
The whole country celebrates the holidays, including Moscow.
And somewhere in a room on duty,
a brigade of duty plumbers and 3-4 plumber specialists are sitting.
And then a phone call comes in,
that there was an accident on the heat networks.
A huge heat network, a pipe, broke, and water flows out into the street.
It's cold at night, it's winter, people are celebrating.
You need to make a decision for the plumber.
Who should be immediately pulled out of the table and sent to liquidate the breakthrough?
What forces should be used, what services should be additionally attracted?
This is an operational decision, it is already made quickly.
Further, decisions can be formalized,
poorly formalized and not formalized.
Formalized decisions are those decisions that are described using numbers, formulas.
And are easily taken into account when processing on electronic computing.
Examples of such a decision can be the decision to pay for newborns.
Because you can count how many men and women in our country,
how many families, how many women of childbearing age,
and how many women who are able to give birth further.
Count how much money will be spent from the budget
to provide all those women who are able to give birth with material stimulation.
This is a formalized decision that was adopted at the state level.
Poorly formalized decisions have a greater degree of uncertainty.
No one can predict what the price of the dollar will be tomorrow.
Or what consequences of price education on transport services and energy carriers
will cause changes in the government of the Russian Federation,
which we have seen just recently.
There are decisions that are not formalized,
that are not formalized in some kind of electronic computing and calculation.
For example, the decision adopted by the brigade commander
in the example of the New Year's Eve and the repair of the thermal power plant.
Further, management decisions are divided into routine, creative and unique.
What are the differences between them?
Routine decisions are those that are adopted without any creative processes in the head of the person who adopts them.
For example, the order to start the heating season is signed annually in the mayors,
in the administration and in a number of municipal organizations.
What is creative here? Nothing.
The order simply changes the dates,
and the person can start working and start borrowing money for hot water.
That's it.
These are simple routine decisions.
Creative decisions differ in that something new needs to be developed here.
For example, the company's exit to some new markets.
What to go out with?
What product?
Where to start?
To openly present yourself as a branch or to agree with someone on some commercial conditions.
Here you need to think and calculate.
This decision can be both tactical, creative and poorly formalized.
Further, unique decisions are further development of creative decisions,
but they differ in that one such decision makes a turn of the company's life.
For example, this is a classic example, it appears in textbooks.
Once cars were produced in small quantities as luxury.
Just for show.
You just drove a car and that's it.
Once Henry Ford made a unique management decision to start mass production of cars.
Of course, it was unpopular at that time, and no one understood it.
But there were a lot of cars.
There were horses, crews, horses, railways.
Why?
Today we all just can't imagine our lives without cars.
Further, there are both periodic and non-periodic decisions.
Periodic decisions are those that arise constantly with a certain regularity.
For example, the care of summer vacation employees.
Every year you need to decide who to let on vacation, when, and make a schedule.
It's all easy and simple.
There are non-periodic decisions, like changing the price policy due to the change in the price of energy.
We don't know when they will change.
If we have energy-efficient production, we have to react to such non-periodic changes in external indicators
by making appropriate decisions.
What to do and how to get out of it.
There are also periodic and non-periodic decisions.
Periodic decisions are those that need to be made now,
like the decision of the brigade of plumbers and plumbers that we repair and apply.
And non-periodic decisions.
For example, we need to decide what we will do in winter, in preparation for winter vacation.
When children go to school, we could offer our company some food for children going on winter vacation.
We have time to think, calculate, and determine methods of decision-making.
Now, after the classification of decisions, let's look at several examples of such decisions.
Let's try to classify them.
Let's recall a very interesting situation.
Many people have read about the legendary hero of America, Thomas Sawyer.
Once his aunt sent him to paint a fence.
We will come back to this example later.
Thomas Sawyer, having no desire to do it,
he was a normal guy, not eager to paint fences,
came to this fence with a bucket of paint, a brush, and no desire.
He painted it, noticed his friend, and asked him to paint it.
Thomas Sawyer persuaded his friend, convinced him,
and he started painting the fence with pleasure.
Then he passed it on to another friend, the third or fourth friend.
And this is how the process ended.
The paint was used, the fence was painted in three and a half rows,
Thomas Sawyer rested in the shade, ate delicious apples, and started to give a bunch of toys.
The question is, what decision was it, internal or external, for Thomas Sawyer?
On the one hand, it was internal, because he did it for himself,
he did not have an organization.
On the other hand, it was external, because he brought in external resources to solve the problem.
The problem was that the fence had to be painted without any desire.
Next, what level of hierarchy was this decision made at?
It was made at the lower level, at the level of the executor,
that is, at the level of the organization.
We look at it by level.
Next, what was this decision, strategic, tactical, or operational?
It was, of course, operational.
He could not expect to be sent to paint the fence in the morning,
and on the other hand, having painted the fence,
it had no consequences for him in the future, in his development as a person.
Next, on the formalizability and non-formalizability of this decision.
Of course, the decision was not subject to formalization, it was informal.
Next, on the routine and creativity, it was a creative decision.
On the one hand, there was nothing unique to turn the world upside down,
or Thomas Sawyer's life.
On the other hand, it was new, and he had to think about it.
This decision was not periodic, it occurred by chance, under the influence of external factors.
And, of course, it was urgent.
This is a simple decision.
Now, looking at how decisions are made, how they are implemented,
let's look at three more points, which concern the implementation of management decisions.
Management decisions, of course, are the dream of every manager,
to be decided in the best way possible.
The decision must be optimal.
An optimal decision is when, having chosen some criteria for the second stage of decision making,
we reach the extremum when considering some function.
This is either the maximum or the minimum.
The optimum function exists.
Let's take a simple example.
When the head of the department selects a team.
The department decides to optimize the number of each unit,
when the number of units is determined based on psychological qualities.
Based on psychology, the department decides that the optimal number of units is 8 people,
7 subordinates.
Why?
Because the maximum number of units of information
a normal person in a normal country can keep under control at the same time.
7 people.
Okay, this is an optimal decision.
There is another type of decision.
This is an acceptable decision.
Some parameters do not allow us,
let's say, the room parameters,
the rooms that are determined by the sales department.
Then we can make a group of 6-7 people.
This is an acceptable decision,
because the head will have 5-6 subordinates,
they all get into the attention zone,
into the control zone,
he controls them normally.
But he has one free will,
and he is underprivileged.
But the decision is acceptable,
it is possible,
and the department can cope with the tasks set by the head.
There is also a group of decisions that are called satisfactory.
In the same example,
when we determine the number of sales units for the first line manager,
as a rule, we have a number of subordinates in the country of 3-5 people.
Why?
There are reasons for this, not psychological,
but reasons for professional training,
professional skills, knowledge and skills,
and also the intellectual abilities of the head.
As a rule, unfortunately,
our managers hardly keep 6-7 people under control.
3-5 is the norm.
If we consider the structure of many companies,
most of them are like this.
When we start drawing the management work structure,
we make decisions on the creation of the entire management system of the organization,
as a rule, we make small organizations,
25 people, no more.
Because we are building with 25 people,
we learn to find management decisions,
how to distribute duties between departments in the best way.
When we try to take more than 50 people,
70 people, then unfortunately our groups are drowning.
Because of the training.
When a person builds a small organization several times,
it becomes easier for him to build for large ones,
and when he comes to his organization,
based on the skills and skills gained,
it is possible to structure the work of the whole organization.
We have an optimal solution,
if we look at psychology,
that is, 7 subordinates and a manager,
that is, 8 people in the department.
An acceptable solution,
when the number of departments is not equal to 8,
that is, from 6-7 people,
in principle, up to 10.
We can overload our manager with additional duties,
additional people,
with certain intellectual qualities,
and this will be justified economically,
according to the second criterion,
according to another criterion,
the criterion of the economy.
When increasing the number of subordinates for each manager,
we reduce the number of managers in the organization,
and, accordingly, reduce the cost of salary
to the paid managers.
This is beneficial for the organization.
But this is the second criterion.
And according to the same criterion,
the psychological composition of the group,
we issue satisfactory solutions,
which simply satisfy the conditions of the organization,
they do not exceed the psychological capabilities of our manager,
and he works quite calmly.
Now let's return to the person making the decision.
As we have already said,
as we know,
the person making the decision can be a single person,
an individual person,
and it can be a collective, collegial person making the decision.
And, accordingly,
before talking about them,
let's briefly consider how decisions are made in the main known models,
the American and Eastern models of management and business.
And, accordingly,
they have their own culture of decision-making,
which is formed by the whole system.
So, in the American model of business management,
each manager of this particular system
personally makes decisions and is responsible for them.
This is the value of this model and the value of this manager.
And, in fact, the value of the mentality of the United States of America.
By the way, the Western model interpreted in the classic management
explains that it is supposedly in the middle
between the American model and the Eastern model.
This is somewhat wrong in my opinion,
because the Western model is a pro-image of the American model.
The American model has grown out of it,
but it has become a little tougher.
The Western model has all the same principles as the American model,
only it is softer, more kind, a little older,
and, accordingly, it has a softer character,
like a person who is older, like a grandmother,
she is much calmer than a 19-year-old lady.
Right?
This is how it is with these models.
The American model is tougher, but all the principles are the same.
In fact, it can be said that in management
there are only two models of management,
the American one, where the material is Eastern,
and in them there are corresponding schemes for making decisions.
So we move on.
By the way, why are we moving on to this,
to the consideration of how decisions are made in these models?
Maybe we don't need it?
Maybe we need it for this.
Many companies in our country are now signing contracts with foreign companies.
We went abroad, we communicate with the West, with America, with the East.
The Asian tigers that grow fast came to our country with different offers.
On the one hand, on the other hand, our guys, growing managers,
who are striving to make a career,
often get a job in a foreign company,
both in a Western, pro-American, or purely American, or in an Eastern company.
And of course, to make a career in these companies,
you need to know the rules of the game.
So, as we know,
the manager makes decisions in the American model personally,
usually without any responsibility,
often without consulting anyone, to the extent of his authority.
He makes decisions, he is responsible for them.
The decision is made quickly, it is quickly realized,
and this has enabled the rapid growth of the American economy
after the creation of the United States of America
and after their transition to the capitalist economy.
After all, America is actually younger than the whole mother Europe,
but it developed quickly and took a leading position.
That is, the entire American economy works better than the entire Western and even Eastern European economies.
The difference between the East and the West is that decisions are made slowly.
Then all decisions are made collectively,
the so-called system of circular visioning.
That is, a group of people is gathered, responsible at some level,
they discuss the problem, find solutions according to the scheme previously discussed,
choose a solution, and then the solution is made.
In fact, while the solutions can be strong, good, and optimal,
no one personally answers for them.
What was the weakness of the Soviet Union,
and what is our model in Russia today,
American, Western or Eastern?
Western.
But the West is not the same.
Then the East remained.
We have an Eastern model.
We have a collegial decision-making,
we have a prime minister who has a cabinet of ministers,
who allegedly participate in decision-making.
We have a collegium of public figures,
heads of sub-departmental organizations,
who also meet periodically to make collegial decisions.
Let's take the simplest question.
Can you do it with my example?
When I was doing my postgraduate studies,
I had to write a document called a characteristic.
It was signed by the head of the department,
the pro-fork department, the port-ork department, and the comm-sork department.
Four people.
After that, I moved from the department to the faculty level,
a little higher, to another level of management.
And there I was signed by the port-ork faculty,
the pro-fork faculty, the comm-sork faculty, and the dean of the faculty.
It seemed that I could be congratulated on my postgraduate studies.
This was the decision of management implementation.
After that, the characteristic went to an even higher level,
to the top level, where it was signed by the chairman of the port-comm,
the vice-chairman of the university's legal committee,
the secretary of the university's committee of the LCCM,
and the rector of the university's higher educational institution.
In total, 12 signatures, plus the signature of the scientific director,
who accepted me, 13.
Any person, any citizen of the Soviet Union in those years,
in order to enter the postgraduate studies,
according to the usual, simple, eastern model of decision-making,
had to have a good, at least, a friendly, comfortable relationship
with any official at any level.
Any un-signed characteristic could slow down the decision-making.
And it would never be implemented.
And no one would be responsible for it.
Here are two models.
A person, choosing a company,
moving to another job,
finishing the MBA course with a master's degree in business administration,
making a decision about the choice of a Western, American or Eastern company,
has to look at himself first.
How do I like to make decisions?
How do I make them?
If I make decisions quickly, personally, and I am ready to answer,
I go to the companies where the model of decision-making is in line.
And it will provide a fast career growth.
Especially having a master's degree in business administration.
If the technique, methodology and the mentality of a researcher
of a higher career position
often provides for consultations,
having colleagues, discussing the decision in a hurry,
then you have to choose the company where the decisions are made in a proper way.
Now we can look at another vivid example,
which was developed and published in one of our books,
in Soviet times.
A researcher compared the effectiveness of two decision-making models,
the American model and the Eastern model.
The American model was taken by one of the very tough organizations.
He examined the Italian mafia.
How decisions are made there.
What he noticed was that this work was not allowed to be published,
and only in Russia in the 21st century
some people managed to get into some aspects of this work.
The research was very extensive.
He saw that when a mafia soldier comes to his little boss,
he makes decisions himself,
quickly, without consulting anyone, and answers for himself.
He knows that if he made the wrong decisions,
we are talking about right and wrong decisions again,
then what is his fate?
If his boss finds out about his wrong decision,
then his fate is decided.
The legs are in the cement and the hand is in the river.
All life in this tough system, in the competitive economy,
forced him to make the right decisions.
Those who could not make the right decisions,
quickly stopped being little bosses.
Others took their place.
A natural selection for Darwin.
The strongest wins.
Now, if a question asked to a little boss
goes beyond his competence,
and he has no right to make decisions,
he asks this question to his middle boss.
How does the middle boss make decisions?
Of course, quickly, without consulting anyone,
and answers for himself.
And he knows, like his little subordinate boss,
that if he makes the wrong decisions,
he will quickly stop being a middle boss.
Someone from the little bosses will replace him.
The system is mobile, fast,
and it allows this structure to function well
not only in the competitive economy,
but also in the pressure from the state police.
If a middle boss suddenly meets a question
that he has no right to solve,
he passes it to the boss.
He also makes decisions quickly,
unilaterally, without consulting anyone,
and answers for himself.
He answers for all his property and life,
like all other structural fighters.
Of course, in a market economy,
in a civilized market economy,
people who do not cope with their positions
and make wrong decisions,
usually leave their positions,
as a result of competition for jobs,
but stay alive.
Now, our colleague, the researcher,
compared this rigid structure
that makes decisions according to the American model
to another very rigid structure,
but working in a different style.
This structure was the Central Committee of the LCCM,
the All-Russian Leninist Communist Youth Union.
The general-scale event was being prepared.
This structure, which makes decisions
in the style of the Eastern model,
prepared a document,
where it was written who performs what,
when, what resources are provided for it,
and the collection of consent signatures began.
If we need 13 signatures for a simple characteristic,
then for that serious document,
we needed more than 150 signatures.
All signatures were collected,
all signed signatures were positive,
no one dared to sign against it,
but the event was not held.
Why were these two examples given?
Not to scold the Eastern model,
it is strong in its own way.
We know that the Japanese, Chinese, Korean,
Singaporean, even Vietnamese management
are very strong.
They are rapidly developing,
but the model is different.
In the model in which the decision-makers
of the LCCM were making,
no one was punished, no one was harmed.
They checked it, and what?
It did not work.
Just so we know how decisions are made,
we highlighted these two small aspects.
Having considered the two main models of decision-making,
the two systems of decision-making,
and having considered the example
that characterizes both systems,
let's move on to the qualification
of the manager,
that is, the person making the decision,
to see what decisions
he can make
depending on his qualifications.
The first level, the simplest decisions,
is called the routine level,
where simple decisions are made,
without even requiring a choice.
On the one hand,
we have already briefly mentioned
the classification of decisions.
These are simple decisions
when the situation is known,
repeatable,
and you just need to get it done,
signing an order,
sending a letter, and so on.
There is nothing new here,
it is repeated,
and any novice manager
should be able to cope
with the tasks of this level.
The next level of decision-making
is the selective level.
What is its peculiarity?
The peculiarity is that
the person making the decision
chooses an option
from the number of options
available.
If last year
the task of the person
was to choose
the best option,
if last year
the task of reducing costs
was solved
by the personnel potential,
if this year
the task was solved
by expanding
the assortment of the product line,
if the task was solved
in a different way
last year,
the person recalls
the options
and decides to implement the decision.
For example, it is not necessary
that the person takes care of his personnel.
Maybe it is better to take care of them.
Further,
this is a slightly higher qualification,
the person is able to choose,
the manager is able to choose
something ready.
The next level of skill
is the decision-making
of the adaptation level.
And here
the skill is
that the person,
seeing that
the ready options, decisions
are not related to the optimal
or permissible,
but only satisfactory,
tries to find a new decision.
A decision that will allow
from satisfactory
to the permissible,
and from permissible to the optimal.
That's what it is.
Here
you need to be able
to think creatively
and have a developed creativity
in speaking a psychological language.
To generate new ideas,
new approaches,
and sometimes do what was not done before.
For a simple example,
at the beginning of the summer
I was invited to Rostov.
A colleague came to me
and said that he needed my help.
I came and looked at the situation.
He said that he had never done this before
and could not do it.
I came to make a decision
that had never been done before.
If you had found it without me,
you would have done it yourself.
So we did what was offered.
A new decision that had never been
made in that organization before.
And even higher,
the highest in the qualification
of the decision-making level
is the innovative decision.
Here,
as in the example
with Henry Ford,
you need to find something new,
often unique,
that gives a boost.
If these innovative decisions
were made rarely,
we would probably still be in the wild.
Such decisions were made
to create mobile phones.
Many years ago,
working at a high pace,
going somewhere,
being late for a meeting,
I would call,
I would call and warn
or ask to postpone a meeting.
Now every schoolchild
uses this.
Someone once made a decision
to create a new product.
Once, in Japan,
in the eastern model,
which was criticized
for making decisions,
one of the managers
made a decision
to release audio players.
Many did not believe
that it would be successful,
and we are using them successfully.
A more detailed characteristic
requirement for these decision-making levels
is shown on the slide.
Let us now
consolidate these levels
of the manager's qualification
for decision-making
with two more examples.
Both examples are related
to the organization of municipal transport.
We all know what a trolleybus is,
right? Let us talk about trolleybuses.
Both cases took place in the south,
one in Krasnodar,
the other in Rostov Oblast.
What was in Rostov Oblast?
When designing trolleybuses,
as was customary,
they made a mistake
and did not finish
one substation.
The trolleybus line
could not operate.
It did not carry passengers.
But the holiday was coming.
What to do?
We did not have time
to build a substation
from the ready-made solutions.
We came up with a new
adaptation solution.
Let us celebrate
the holiday
with everyone.
Let us launch one trolleybus.
Let us put the best schoolchildren
from the best school in the city
in it.
Let us shoot it on TV,
report it,
congratulate, cut the ribbon.
And then, after the holiday,
we will finish the rest.
That is how we did it.
We adapted the situation
to the problem.
We found a way out
to make it tough.
The system was tough in the East.
The authorities were not being
pitied when they did not
implement the management solutions.
The second example
of professionalism
was in Krasnodar.
When the trolleybus line
was built in a remote
district,
they had to design
and build it.
All the substations were
in their places.
The trolleybus line
was a dead end
from one large enterprise.
It was a dead end
from the station.
It was used
once or twice a month
when the wagons
were delivered
with raw materials.
It was used at night.
However,
the project was required
to be approved
by the law.
The government
did not allow
the trolleybus to be
allowed to run.
Everything was already built.
The stations were built.
The poles were built.
The wires were connected.
It was time to
start the trolleybus.
It was clear that
the Ministry of Railways
did not care about
the municipality in Krasnodar.
What should the Krasnodar
authorities do?
They thought that
the solution was not possible.
They could not adapt
the situation.
A brilliant idea
came to the head
of one of the authorities.
It was an innovative solution.
In what sense?
The project was decided
to divide the trolleybus line
into two parts.
The first part was from the city center
to the railway.
The second part was from the railway
to the end of the microdistrict.
We have come to the holy
of holies of the governance
solutions.
These are the methods of their adoption.
The methods of adoption
of governance solutions
are divided into three large groups.
Basically,
each group of solutions
is discussed, implemented,
and adopted at a certain level
of governance.
As we know from the classical
management theory,
there are three levels of governance
all over the world.
First line managers, middle managers,
and top managers.
According to these levels,
such methods were developed.
The first group of methods
of adoption of governance solutions
is called intuitive
or volitional.
The second group
is mathematical methods.
The third group
is creative methods.
So, what are the differences
between them?
Let's consider.
Volitional or intuitive methods
are adopted
based on some
thought processes.
When an individual
thinks about something,
solves an unformalized task,
he can't explain
why and how
he made a decision.
As in our example
with a brigade of investigators
and plumbers
who sent two people
to close the dam,
two to localize the leak,
and one to call
the additional services,
it is unlikely
that he will explain why.
He relied on qualifications,
discipline, professionalism,
and so on.
But he made a decision
without expecting anything.
There was nothing creative in it.
It was just a simple
operative decision.
Often we make decisions
intuitively, without thinking.
A person chooses
one of two or three tasks.
Someone makes
big tables of pros and cons
to make a right decision.
And sometimes
he makes a wrong decision.
These decisions
are usually made
by a willpower,
a leadership potential.
These decisions are usually
made by first-line managers.
It is a simple decision.
A person makes a table of tasks
for the participants.
He made someone do something.
Let it not always
be a part of his duties.
The next group
is decision-making
by mathematical modeling.
There is a whole
arsenal of tools
that allows
to write all the data,
to find mathematical models,
to include triple,
integral, double,
integral matrices,
to make a powerful
statistical processing
and to prepare
some initial data
for decision-making
by a willpower
or just
give a ready-made decision.
For example,
you can calculate
the performance
of a branch of a company
by a mathematical program.
You can calculate
the market demand
and market saturation.
You can do it with a different range,
with a market segment orientation,
with a group of consumers.
You can write
and talk about these methods
and how to make a comparison,
how to make predictions.
It is all in textbooks.
Let's move to another group
of methods of decision-making
and decision-making.
Here, as a rule,
creative decisions,
we have already talked about it,
require a high level of qualification
of the decision-making person
or a group of decision-making persons.
They are divided into several groups.
This is a large group.
They are required
in situations
when there is a lot of uncertainty
and a high risk.
When the situation
is undetermined,
mathematically indescribable,
but a decision is required.
This is a strategy for the development
of something.
This is a decision
like the one we had
with the trolleybus.
Here,
of course,
from the decision-making person,
from the collegial decision-making person,
high creative abilities are required,
or creativity,
creativity.
Nevertheless,
even without high creative people,
these methods can work,
especially if we organize
a group method,
use group methods
of decision-making.
After all, creative decisions
can be made individually.
There are appropriate exercises
that allow a person to learn
how to make these decisions.
But it is much easier
to make a collective decision
with the help of appropriate methods.
Why is it more profitable?
How profitable is it?
How did the researchers calculate
the efficiency
of the number of developed
solutions at the second stage,
at the third stage,
when the ideas and options
of solving the problem are generated?
If a group works,
then the number of proposals
is 70% higher
than if we sum up
the proposals of each member
of this group
when they work separately.
That is, if 7 people worked
on 10 solutions separately,
we got 70,
then these same 7 people
working in a group
produce more than 100 solutions,
more than 100 proposals.
This is the efficiency.
It is clear that a person
who can organize
a group work
to use creative methods
of decision-making
wins a lot
compared to those
who cannot organize a group work.
Maybe this is the strength
of the Eastern model of governance,
that they work in a group.
The creative methods
of group decision-making
include brainstorming,
meetings, seminars,
expert assessment
and business play.
Let's briefly touch on brainstorming.
What is it?
Brainstorming is usually
dedicated to solving a problem.
Three groups of participants are formed.
The first group is called
idea generators,
who can be both specialists
and non-specialists.
Of course,
we want to have people
with high creative abilities
in this group,
or at least able to
generate ideas.
This group usually includes
7-12 people,
which is enough.
The second group is
so-called system operators,
who try to determine
how feasible
a decision is.
On the one hand,
and on the other hand,
how new it is.
So, it is known, new,
and feasible-unfeasible.
The third group is analysts,
who try to analyze
and assess resource costs
from the decisions
that come out
as feasible
from the second group,
and the third group
is analysts,
who try to
determine
how feasible
a decision is.
So,
how does the first group work?
It is the most important.
The second and third groups
are more or less clear.
The first group
works as follows.
First,
they are offered a cup of coffee,
listening to some background music,
and someone tells them
about a problem.
They don't really get into it,
they listen to it,
and then
they are offered
to make some suggestions
on how to solve
this problem.
At the stage of intelligence,
the persuasive request
to all participants
is to talk about their own.
Everyone can either
write down their suggestions,
then voice them,
and as they do so,
they can write down
their new ideas,
which were born associatively.
Or
they can make their suggestions
right away.
It's not about that.
It's about 5-10 minutes
of lazy talking,
of some kind of baggage,
of some kind of idea.
After that,
a short pause is made,
and participants
sit down again
to listen to
the same light,
but different,
encouraging music.
They start discussing
these ideas without criticism,
only highlighting the strongest ideas,
without criticizing.
This process is repeated at all stages
of ideas generation.
Their task is to develop new ideas
based on those ideas.
It's a work on association.
And here,
at this stage,
a qualitative leap occurs
in the number of ideas
and suggestions
that outperform
the work of individuals.
Right here.
This stage lasts
until a group is exhausted.
If it's 7 minutes,
the group starts to exhale,
trying to warm it up.
But within 15-20 minutes,
the group usually exhales
and stops generating ideas.
At this stage,
the group's work stops.
The group is thanked
for its creative participation
in solving the problem.
Moreover, even non-professionals
can generate ideas
and pass them on to other groups.
And this is where
the work begins.
An example of this
use of brainstorming
can be an interesting operation.
An interesting situation.
We know that there was
the Great Patriotic War
during the World War.
Germany, for the first time
in the history of mankind,
invented
underwater torpedoes
that were launched
from the bottom of the class
by the water.
They were launched by the water,
and reached the target.
They were designed
primarily for the enemy's submarines.
Germany destroyed
the British fleet first.
The torpedo was launched.
It was discovered very late,
when the submarine,
having a lot of weight,
had to be protected.
The British Navy
gathered officers,
including non-professionals,
and started thinking
what to do.
They generated ideas.
When the ideas
at the stage of mass generation
were coming to an end,
they decided to speed up the situation.
They said,
you officers are waiting
on the bridge,
and you are 5 meters away
from the submarine.
What to do?
The officers and the submarines
wanted to live.
One of them said,
I don't care about your tasks.
The neighbor said,
I don't care.
We will launch a single shot
at the enemy's torpedo.
The water splashes out,
the torpedo is thrown up,
the direction changes,
and the torpedo passes
above the submarine.
Or below.
The direction of movement changes.
That's it. The solution was found.
It was a simple and effective solution,
although it was difficult
to come up with something.
I would like to say
that after listening to this course,
and looking at the electronic textbook,
we have some skills left,
some tools to solve problems.
And since any person
who starts his career
as a first-line manager
strives to reach the top,
we will look at what is useful
at all levels.
And now let's look
at the important points
in organizing a brainstorming,
which help to organize it
in your company.
First of all,
there are many questions,
including,
it seems,
that it is necessary to have
some qualities to lead
a brainstorming.
No, no such qualities
are required.
You just need to know how to use technology.
When we come to the doctor
to treat a tooth,
we demand leadership qualities from him.
No, he can drill, find,
put a seal,
and nothing else is required.
So, when organizing a brainstorming,
no special qualities are required.
You just need to know how to select
a group of idea generators,
which will perform two stages,
scouting generation
and cascade idea generation.
That's all.
You just need to know how to select
people with creative abilities.
How do they select?
They are selected by tests.
There is a simple test
for the dominant type of thinking,
that is, for right-left half-circle.
Faces with a pronounced
right-left half-circle
are the dominant type of thinking.
Logicians, those who work
more with a left-half-circle,
are better not to invite
to the group of idea generators.
What is required?
After setting the task,
you need to ensure
one simple rule
that no ideas are criticized.
All ideas are announced
and new ideas
should arise
in the group of idea generators.
It is not necessary
to fix a specific idea.
Each idea is fixed
and recorded on a piece of paper.
The paper is handed over
to the group number 2
after both stages of idea generation.
All ideas,
110, 112, 170,
are handed over to the group number 2.
That's all.
We do not criticize anyone.
We encourage new statements.
New ideas.
In the first group,
ideas are not criticized,
but any, even the most fantastic ideas
are encouraged.
They are welcomed.
As many as you want.
Any most unrealistic ideas,
even to do something
with a phantom reflector or a disintegrator.
There are no disintegrators yet.
They are handed over to the group number 2.
After that,
they work there.
In the first part,
the ideas are not signed
by the author.
They are considered
a product of the collegial generation.
The group,
which produced
the ideas one by one,
without the authorship of the ideas,
is sent to the next group.
There they are divided
into three baskets.
We usually have a ballot box.
Or we call them differently.
In one basket,
unrealizable ideas are put together.
Out of these 170 proposals,
a whole bunch of them.
In the other basket,
realizable ideas are put together.
And in the third basket,
potentially realizable ideas.
Ideas that can be realized
when resources or technology
are used.
For example,
the press has reported
that Siemens
has made
a folding display
with a size
of a notebook.
Unfortunately,
the developers
can see
four shades of gray on it.
They want to make it colorful.
What are these displays for?
They should be connected
to mobile phones.
We have a phone with an Internet output,
small calculators, processors.
They make the keyboard
to the mobile phone.
To get rid of computers in life,
not to carry laptops,
not to have computers at home.
Computers are considered
as a dying generation of technology.
We need screens.
We take a pocket screen,
edit the text,
send it to someone
or connect
a printing device
and print the text.
The decision,
the principal decision,
is to make such
folding displays.
The technical decision
does not allow
mass production.
The decision about the creation
of such a display
is put in a folder
with potential solutions.
The solutions that are not realized
are excluded from the review.
The third group
is given
the solutions that are realized
today.
The group of analysts
considers
how these solutions
should be provided,
calculates them,
to develop the basic options,
including the use of mathematical methods
to further
implement this decision.
Potentially, the implementation of the solution
is also considered by other groups,
since they are not relevant
at the moment.
These are the possible options
of the management decision,
which are not urgent.
I hope it is clear now
that the company does not invite
specialists of game engineering,
who can easily organize
such interesting events.
The whole brainstorming
takes 1-2 hours
of astronomical time.
The next very interesting method
that is in the group
of creative methods
of decision-making
is a meeting.
It is easy and difficult at the same time.
Why is it easy?
Because every day,
every week, our managers
hold some meetings.
The difficulty is that we are used to them
and we make a lot of mistakes
that
sharply reduce the efficiency
of management activity.
Mistakes in holding meetings.
I had to configure the meeting system
in one Russian company
of the pro-Western type.
First, I held the meeting
myself,
working as a head of the internal training service.
Secondly,
since I already had experience
in holding meetings,
I knew the technology,
studied it on purpose.
Having launched the meeting technology
for the people who participated in it,
who held the meeting themselves,
I was very surprised.
How surprised?
First of all,
since almost everyone has experience
in holding meetings
or participation in them,
we will decide what roles there are in the meeting.
After that, we will try to remove
the shortcomings that are visible today
or try to make them a virtue.
So, when holding a meeting,
first of all,
there is
the role of the chairman,
the person who leads.
It does not necessarily mean
the head of the unit or the whole organization.
It can be another person
whom he trusts or entrusts to conduct it.
There is an organizer of the meeting,
the person who notifies
the participants,
sends them information.
There is a reporter
or co-reporters who speak
with the reporter or co-reporters
on the previously outlined problems.
And there are participants
who listen to the reports
and make decisions.
Moreover,
it is desirable to have a group of people
at the meeting
a little later,
who are on the so-called
short leash.
A person sits at his workplace
and does his official duties,
but he knows that at such a time
he can be invited to a meeting
on such a question.
For example, someone in the personnel department
of the sales organization
conducts a meeting on the market capture.
He knows that he can be invited
on such a question,
he can do without it.
He does not go anywhere,
he does his own business.
He does not go to other meetings,
does not go to another organization,
does not meet potential future employees.
He works with papers,
he is not distracted by anything.
Now the question is,
what is the purpose of the meeting?
At the meetings,
operational issues are solved,
which require a creative approach,
a creative solution.
And here there is an interesting rule,
developed over the years abroad,
that meetings are held
only when it is impossible
to do without them.
Here we have,
as a rule,
especially in administrative structures,
the so-called meeting of the next plan.
The head of some units
is asked to tell them
what they need to do
in such an instructive and
directive manner.
He asks for reports on what they have done
and sets new tasks.
We even have a video
about such meetings
in Russia.
The question is,
what are these meetings
for?
Let's take an example.
The governor of the Krasnodar Territory,
Nikolai Ignatievich Kondratenko,
used to like to hold
planning meetings.
I know how they were held there.
All heads of local municipalities
would meet on Mondays
at 10 or 11 o'clock
in the Krasnodar Territory administration.
Someone would drive
250-300 km,
and they would come.
They would spend
3-4 hours on the road.
And the governor
would set tasks for them,
ask for reports.
All heads of local municipalities
would sit with them
and listen to their tasks,
their indicators,
what they had done in the past month,
what they needed to do, etc.
I have a question.
What prevented them
from sending these tasks
on the Internet?
People would sit for 3-4 hours
and listen to their ideas.
They did not generate their ideas,
did not make any proposals.
Why did they go?
After the meeting,
they would solve their own questions
with deputies,
with heads of local municipalities,
and then go back.
They would spend 3-4 hours on the road.
They would lose their working day.
Why?
It's easy and simple.
The meeting is held
when it is necessary to find solutions
and when it is impossible to do without people's contact.
There is a so-called
in-person meeting,
when information is sent.
The same report is prepared
by the reporters.
The report is prepared by the reporters.
The internal mail is also sent
to those people who are interested
in solving the issue.
They study it, write their conclusions,
their proposals, and send it back
to the organizer of the in-person meeting.
Not to the organization's leader,
not to his deputy,
but to the person
who is preparing the issue.
The person prepares the issue,
gets acquainted with the proposals,
and if it is possible to do without
the gathering of people,
without their absence,
then the decision is made
in person by the person
who makes the decision,
by the person who is responsible for it.
Why is it suggested
to refuse
the gathering of people
and the in-person meetings?
In the end,
meetings are considered
the most expensive
type of management activity in the world.
Why?
When I held a meeting
in this pro-Western organization,
I sent out a schedule
and a note at the bottom
that one minute of our meeting
costs the same amount
as the organization.
Because everyone has their own
budget for the meeting.
The leaders usually have high budgets
with bonuses.
So, every hour of work
can be estimated in rubles,
and every minute, respectively.
Accordingly,
the meeting schedule,
which is recommended
all over the world,
was that
the time for the speaker's speech
is 2-3 minutes,
because if the report is already sent out,
it is easy to go through
the pain points.
And the time for the speech
in the discussions,
the time for the participants' statements
is exactly one minute.
Can you imagine
the shock
that the organizer of the meeting
asked for?
One minute for a speech?
How come?
We are not used to talking like this,
and when the participants
of the meeting gathered,
I explained to him
why such a strict requirement.
Generally,
the normal speech pace
of a person
who is perceived by the listener
is 2 words per second.
In 60 minutes,
one can say 120 words.
If the length of one sentence
is 4-5-6 words,
then, accordingly,
one can say 20 sentences
in one minute.
I have a question.
If a meeting is held
about a problem
that could not be solved,
and suddenly
a participant of the meeting
has 20 sentences to solve,
why is it still not solved?
The conversation about nothing
during the meeting
is expensive for the organization.
The request was to express
a proposal to solve the problem.
I propose to solve the problem
in this way,
with the help of such resources.
This is my request,
my proposal,
my limitation on the length
of the meeting.
It turns out to be practical
in the eastern management model.
The speaker is allowed to speak
for one minute.
After one minute,
the microphone is turned off.
This is normal.
This is the custom in the country
of the rising sun.
If he continues to speak
without a microphone,
he simply goes down
to the floor with the audience.
Technically,
it is impossible to speak
for more than two minutes.
This is the custom of the high management culture
in the east.
Now the total length
of the meeting,
if we hold it from start to finish,
should be no more than 45 minutes.
In 45 minutes,
we need to consider
the issues on the agenda,
find the proposed solutions,
and pass them on to the specialists
so that they can find
and justify the resource provision.
The meetings of 2,
3, or 4 hours are of no importance
because a person gets tired
after 45 minutes,
and he needs a break.
Let's look at schools.
The educational system
works for 45 minutes worldwide.
Why? Because a person needs a break.
The head gets tired of thinking.
Is it clear?
Considering these points,
the speech is within one minute,
the report is within 2-3 minutes,
and the length of the meeting is 45 minutes.
The meeting is held only
when it is impossible to do without it.
How many time resources
will it allow to set up
an organization in any company
that will take into account
the 4 simple rules
when holding a meeting?
How much more
will the employees do their business
instead of attending meetings
and often imitating
their business activity
at this meeting?
They may write down a note,
try to raise their hand,
throw in a few lines,
or talk for a long time.
The next way
to organize a group work
is a seminar.
It is not only
a seminar,
but also a way
to solve a production problem.
A seminar is not
a way to solve
a production problem.
Unlike meetings,
it is held much less often
and is about
non-urgent problems
that are more strategic
than meetings.
Therefore,
the seminar preparation time
is 1.5-2 weeks,
whereas a meeting
is 1.5-2 months.
There are also chairpersons,
reporters,
and listeners
who are interested in solving
this problem,
as well as seminar organizers.
The seminar is different.
A report is made
more often
because the problem is more serious.
However,
I think that if people
are interested in solving a problem,
they should listen to it.
If there is something to talk about
for 15 minutes,
then it is possible.
This is my recommendation.
This is the seminar's approach.
Unlike meetings,
the chairperson is recommended
to organize
a round of statements
from participants
so that everyone
can speak out
on the problem
and its solution.
First,
after listening to the painful points,
then after listening
to the painful points,
and then after listening
so that the person can prepare
in advance for the solution.
Third,
his statement should allow
someone to initiate
some thoughts.
What is also common
in seminars and meetings
is that both
are recommended
to let participants
stand up
and walk around
for 45 minutes.
Of course, they should not step on the floor
or knock on the door.
The room should be cool and cozy
with mineral water on the tables.
If participants of the seminar
are not familiar with each other,
let alone a large company
with 10,000 people in the state,
each participant should have
a sign with his name and position
so that they can address each other
That's all.
I think it is clear
how to reduce the time
to hold a meeting
and increase their effectiveness.
Next,
another way
of organizing
a group work
when adopting
creative methods
for governance decisions
is an expert assessment.
How is it done?
Usually,
10-15 experts
are enough
to solve a problem.
They may not know each other,
but they are in different organizations.
It is not necessary
to be in your own organization.
They are given a description
or a report
of the same person
who took part in the meeting
or was supposed to attend the seminar
but decided to refuse.
The problem is that
the experts may be paid,
free, public, etc.
Each of them is assessed
by a certain parameter
as an expert.
There are tables and developed methods
to assess the importance
of an expert and his decision.
They work.
Mathematicians believe
that it is necessary
to have a decision
that is mathematically and statistically
correct.
There are more than 100 experts.
It is hard to achieve this
in production.
It is hard to solve
tactical problems.
It may not make sense.
In any case,
all business processes
and organization development
are always a process
associated with risk
and a system
with a large probability
of uncertainty.
There may be changes.
The number of experts
is not a goal.
They may read a decision
and it may be changed
or not even take place.
We will talk about
the necessary decisions
later.
Our goal
is to learn
to make the right decisions.
Experts work.
They develop
their own criteria
and recommendations
on solving problems.
They submit them to an organizer.
The working group
and the organizer
look at the proposals
based on the rating
and importance
of the experts.
They also
provide resources.
The most important
and realistic decisions
are made by the organizer.
There is another
interesting way
of organizing a group
of people
who make decisions
called a business game.
What is its advantage?
It has a huge advantage
compared to other methods.
Why?
It not only allows
to find solutions,
but also to develop
the organization.
First of all,
it is a training of management skills.
It is a promotion of
the participants' skills.
They learn new approaches
and develop their cooperation.
They develop their skills
to solve similar problems.
They are used to generating
new ideas.
In a business game,
the group is more active.
The American model
of individualistic work
in the USA
is based on
the training of the team.
The American team
is trained
to work as a team.
Why?
Because the Americans
have been learning to work
individually for two and a half
hundred years.
Group decisions are more
important.
A business game
allows to solve a task
and strengthen a team.
A manager is not a manager
until he has a team.
What are business games?
They are different.
A business game has two plans.
The first one is
solving a problem.
The second one is
training of certain actions.
The second plan is not
a business game.
Only experienced players
and coaches know
that there is a plan.
They try to solve it
to the maximum.
Usually, the task is solved,
but the second plan
works regardless
of the organizers' qualifications.
Business games can be
imitation, management,
and so on.
I have more than
100 games
where we make decisions,
learn management skills,
learn theoretical questions
in management,
such as conflictology,
organizational structures,
and at the same time
solve team formation,
leadership qualities,
creative abilities,
and stress-resistance.
These are the advantages
of business games.
The task is set,
the participants are informed
about the task,
and the game scenario is developed.
I can't tell you about the scenarios
because every game
has its own scenario.
For example, we know
the game of the shipwrecked.
It is a well-known scenario
where you can lose a lot of situations
and find solutions.
In business games,
the task is
to make a smooth
and gradual decision.
The strongest decisions
are the ones
approved by the majority
of the team.
In business games,
unlike seminars
and expert assessments,
the task is
to make a smooth
and gradual decision.
The task is to make a smooth
Unlike seminars and expert assessments,
meetings and brainstorming
allow to bring
the entire team
to the solution of the problem.
You can organize
the game scenario
on the lower levels
where each specialist
and team member
make a general decision
and then the decision
is transferred to another level
of the first line managers.
The decision is processed
in the same way
as the first line managers
process the ideas
that were proposed
from the specialists' level.
The decisions are processed,
the approaches are developed,
they are strengthened
and transferred to the middle level.
The middle level is again
divided into 2-3 groups
and each group makes improvements
and strengthens the decisions
so that each member of the team
and each organization
becomes involved
in the decision
that is made
at the top level.
The first line managers
and specialists
are involved in the business game
and in the game form.
What is the advantage of the game form?
People do not offend each other.
They play.
If someone outplayed someone,
it is a game.
Why should you be offended
if he is stronger?
We do not really get offended
when we play volleyball
team against team.
Unlike meetings,
if a decision has been made,
an alternative figure
and decision-maker
can be offended.
I proposed a decision
that is better than that.
My decision is always better
than that decision.
It is a shame on the management
and on the person who came up with the decision.
In the game,
it is difficult to offend
your colleagues
because the decisions are collegial.
Secondly, they are getting stronger
and stronger.
Even if someone's decision
did not pass,
it is a game.
It is a psychological atmosphere
of trust and comfort.
It is better to make decisions
through business games
than through meetings and seminars.